So in this video we're going to look at array's as a data structure.
So the most important thing to understand about arrays is how they're stored in memory.
And essentially they're stored as one contiguous block in memory.
And what I mean by that is you don't have the items or elements in an array scatter throughout memory
all of the elements items whatever you want to call them in an array they're all stored as one contiguous
block.
So let's say an array starts at memory address 100.
That's a bogus memory address.
You wouldn't have a memory address like that but to keep things simple let's pretend that we have an
array that starts at memory address 100.
And let's say that array is 200 bytes long.
Well then what happens is starting at memory address one hundred the following 200 bytes are the contents
of the array.
So the array is just one huge block and that's why we have to specify the length of the array when we
create the array because that tells the JVM how much memory it has to allocate for that array.
And it's one reason why arrays can't be resized because if they could be resized then there'd be no
guarantee after that that whatever.
When we added extra space on that that extra space would be in that same contiguous block of memory.
So arrays have a static lens.
And when you when you create an array there is one huge block of memory allocated for that array.
So the elements of an array are not scattered all over the place in memory.
Now the second important thing about arrays is every element in the array occupies the same amount of
space and memory.
For example when we created our int array every item that we put into that array will be an integer.
And in Java an integer is 4 bytes so every value in our interracially was occupying 4 bytes and memory.
You can't have an array element that occupies 4 bytes and then the second array element occupies 12
bytes and the third array element occupies 300 bytes.
That doesn't work.
Now at this point you might be thinking about objects and thinking well wait a minute what if I create
an array of strings.
I mean the strings in the array could be a different lens so they're you know they're going to be taking
up different amounts of memory.
What's important to understand when you're working with objects not primitives.
Like when you're working but it's but when you're working with objects what's stored in the variables
is an object reference.
So when you create an array of objects what's stored in the array elements is in a reference to those
objects and object references are always the same size regardless of the type of object they're referring
to.
So if you create an array of string you what you're actually storing in the array is a bunch of object
references to the String instances and those object references are all going to be the same size.
And that's why you can have an object array and store any type of object in there it's because the object
references to the different instances are always the same size.
So arrays occupy one contiguous block in memory in every element in the array occupies the same amount
of space in memory.
So because of that we can easily calculate the memory address of an array element based on its index.
So if an array starts at memory address X and the size of each element in the array is why then we can
calculate the memory address of the bytes elements so array.
By using the following expression X plus times Y.
And we're going to look at an example of this in a couple of slides so you'll see an illustration of
this.
So basically what that means is if we know the index of an element in the in the array then the time
or the number of steps we have to do to retrieve that element will be the same no matter where it is
in the array because all we have to do to get the memory address of that element is X plus times Y.
And that works whether we want the first element in the array or the 5000 element in the array or the
one millionth element in the array.
All we ever have to do to get really quickly to that element is to do that simple calculation to get
the memory address.
And this is made possible because of the first two points because arrays are one large contiguous block
in memory and because every element in the array occupies the same amount of space in memory.
So let's have a look at this for the array we just created.
So we created an array of Lent 7.
So the Vallet indices are 0 to 6 and the values are 20 35 minus 15 755 one in minus 22.
Now for this example we're going to pretend the start address of the array is 12 as I said that's a
bogus memory address.
You know it doesn't matter what the number is.
And because these are integers the element size is 4 bytes.
So if we wanted to get the element at arrays 0 Well that's equal to the start address of the array right.
Because the array starts here at 12.
And so the first element of the array is actually going to have the same address as the beginning of
the array.
So if we want the address of our way of array 0 we just we get 12 if we want the thirty five we need
to jump past the 20.
And so if we want array 1 we're going to start at 12 and then we're going to add 4 bytes because we
know that the size of each of these elements is 4 bytes.
And so if we want the second element in the array we start at the memory address which is 12 and we
add 4 bytes.
And now we're at the start address for the thirty five.
So that's 12 plus one times for equal 16 and if we go back to our calculation here that's the X plus
i times Y.
So X is the 12th.
Why is the Index which in this case is one and why is the size of each element in the array which is
4.
So that's how we're doing this calculation.
So if we want minus 15 we've got a jump over two elements.
So we're going to start at 12.
And this time we're going to add two times 4 to it to get 20.
So the 15 must start at 20.
We want to get to the seven we've got to jump over three elements to get to the 7 so that's going to
be 12 plus three times four and that will give us 24 and so on.
And this is possible because the array is one contiguous block in memory so all the elements are stored
in one block in order.
And also because every element occupies the same space in memory if that wasn't true of either of those
two requirements weren't true we would not be able to use a simple formula to quickly go to an element
in the array.
So what this means is that if we know the index of an element in the array we can get to it really quickly
and it doesn't matter where it is in the array.
I mean if you look at array 1 versus array 6 we're doing the same calculation and we're actually doing
the calculation here as well I didn't show it but this is actually 12 plus 0 times 4 which has 12 plus
0 which is 12 and now maybe you can understand why array indices are zero based because if they were
0 based IF they started at one we'd have to subtract 1 here because then we'd have 12 plus 1 times 4
we that would be wrong because then we'd get 16 for the first one so we'd have to always subtract 1
before we did the multiplication starting the indices at zero means we don't have to do that.
So we can just substitute the array index in here because remember this is 0 times 4.
I probably should have written that out but I didn't.
So one of the things that arrays are really good at doing is really retrieving elements if you know
the index.
So if we know the index of the element we want we can get to that element very quickly regardless of
where the element is in the array.
OK so now we understand how arrays are stored under the covers and we understand why if when we have
an index of an array we can get to the element really really quickly doesn't matter where the element
is in the array.
We do the same calculation.
So with that in mind let's move on and look at the Big O values for array operations.
I'll see you in the next video.